Ladies and gentlemen,
please welcome Director of
Product Marketing,
Ken Bereskin.
Welcome back everybody.
You know, one of the things that really
excites me about the short-term,
medium-term,
and especially the long-term prospects
for Mac OS X is it truly is a system
that has something for everybody.
You heard a lot from the customer
perspective this morning in terms of
the great features and technologies,
but taking a look at what Mac OS X means
to the developer community,
what I see is if you've dedicated
yourself to Mac programming
over the last 15 to 17 years,
this is a perfect evolution where you
can bring your products to life again,
incredible new capabilities.
If you've done a ton of Unix programming
and you're looking for a platform that
you can ship millions and millions of
copies of your product with a great,
beautiful, consistent user interface,
Mac OS X has your favorite toys
and technologies in spades.
If Windows drove you to Java programming,
have we got a great Java implementation
for you with Sun's Java 2
Standard Edition built in.
And if you have that spark of the
next great idea that you're just
trying to find the best possible
way to bring that idea to life,
Cocoa and its advanced object-oriented
capabilities is a perfect ideal platform.
Wrap all that together,
this is an exciting time
to be a Mac developer.
If you're new to the
conference for the first time,
we welcome you.
And this is really an important session,
as always.
It's the transition from the high-level
overviews into really why you're here,
getting into the heart and
the meat of the system.
I'd like to bring on stage a
person who's had a huge amount
of pressure on his shoulders,
being responsible for the software
engineering of Mac OS X and shipping it,
as we promised earlier this year,
building a great team that's
been working tirelessly,
listening to your feedback,
trying to factor it into our plans,
and now planning for the future.
Bertrand certainly cares a
great deal about Mac OS X,
and he's going to share his personal
insights into what Mac OS X is all
about from his unique perspective.
I'd like to warmly
welcome Bertrand Serlet,
Vice President of Mac OS X Engineering.
Thank you.
good afternoon let me tell you how life
in the software engineering works at
apple two months before the developers
conference you get the message from
an email from so they're operations
hey guys uh... i think you know but
two months from now uh... since the
developers conference everything so
yeah two months from now plenty of time
i could keep feeling we've whatever i'm
doing you know great technology all that
stuff and you forget all about it and
then two weeks and before the conference
you get another message saying we need
your slides now then certainly all my
god i need to scramble i need to make
a mess like that i need to prepare some
demos and i have an unstable system
i have you know this this system that's
broken because it's currently the middle
of the bill and whatever and so so this
is typically how it happens so this year
is different first we decided early in
the process to talk about the present no
talk about like fancy new technologies
that is being developed and that maybe
one day we'll come out we decided to
talk with what you have uh... and that's
my question the other thing quite frankly
is that uh... we were a little tired
after march twenty fourth so we took
some vacation uh... at least a lot of
folks in software engineering took some
vacation so this year should have been
a fairly straightforward presentation
however i had a personal challenge
which is this morning you've heard
steve and avi and they've been talking
a lot about what is Mac OS ten steve
said the the context you know the big
picture kind of thing avi set up the high
level goals and also went to some level
of detail on what is Mac OS ten so i
thought okay what should i do this year?
to make it interesting for you and not
having too many repeats and also i'm
assuming that most of you have been
running Mac OS ten the final version
or the public beta or its pre-releases
for quite a while now what i decided
to do is to talk about ten great things
about Mac OS ten ten things that i
feel very strongly personally that
are great and unique to Mac OS ten
So the first thing I selected
for you is the architecture.
I am very proud of the
architecture of Mac OS X.
You've seen that graphics, okay?
So it's a very nice graphics.
It kind of looks like a
marketing piece of graphics,
but there's some enduring
reality behind it.
Okay, so let's focus on just a little
bit on each of the layers.
So let's take Darwin.
Darwin is also named the Core-S,
and in fact in some sessions
you may see that as the Core-S.
Okay, that's kind of where
Mac OS X derives all of its power.
That's the engine room kind of things.
So what does that mean
for you as a developer?
Well, it means you can harness that
power by using the Core-S,
okay?
And you have some APIs, okay,
inside the Core-S.
So you can have the Core-S that
brings some functionality all
the way through the stacks,
okay, to the Carbon stack,
the Cocoa stack, or whatever stack, okay?
And you can leverage all that
power through the toolboxes.
Also, of course,
you can directly go down one level
and go to the level of the POSIX API.
So I should probably stop
here for a second because the
terminology is a little confusing.
Okay, Mac OS X is a Unix-like system.
It has Unix functionality, okay?
It's actually very close to the Mac OS X.
It's very close to FreeBSD.
A lot of the code that we're integrating
for commands and then libraries
comes from the FreeBSD code base.
And POSIX is a standard for
the API set in the Unix world.
So that's where you have
functions like open,
read, write, you know,
all those kind of usual
functions to dealing with files.
So you can directly access the
Core-S through the POSIX APIs.
We are very close to the POSIX API set.
And the other way you can,
as a developer, leverage the Core-S is
to use shell commands.
So, of course, you know,
no end user will ever use shell commands.
At least we hope, okay?
If there's still a few places
where Unix shows through,
okay, for the end user,
we have failed and we
will plug those things,
okay?
But as a developer, you might be able to
leverage the existence on
the system of shell commands.
Shell commands is a way of scripting.
It's a very powerful
way where you can plug,
you know, things together, piping,
in Unix terminology.
The last level down in the core R.S.
is Mac.
Mac is a microkernel architecture.
I should clarify this point
because there was some controversy.
We actually are not the classical
microkernel with lots of little
services that talk to each other.
We wanted to have a highly performing
system and we decided to link all that
code into one for performance reasons
because then you can short-circuit
a lot of the communication cost.
But conceptually,
it is a microkernel and at the API level,
the Mac API are great APIs to
go at the lowest level,
to deal with VM,
to deal with inter-process communication.
And so you may want to be at that level,
although hopefully you'll stay at
the high level as much as possible,
of course.
Now there is another way
to leverage the CoreOS.
You can extend it.
And the primary means of extension
is what we call kernel extension.
And the vast majority of all
kernel extensions are drivers.
So we have devised a subsystem called
I/O Kit to help you write drivers.
And I'll talk a little
bit more about that.
There are other forms of extensions,
of kernel extensions.
You can add a new file system stack.
And I'm sure we'll see a few coming
in the next few years on Mac OS X,
which is quite exciting.
You can add a networking protocol layer,
a networking protocol stack as well.
Okay.
The kernel extension mechanism is useful.
All those things enable you to do that.
But on Mac OS X, contrary to Mac OS 9,
it should be fairly rare
to have an extension.
In fact, on 9 and previous version,
you typically,
sometimes when you have an application,
you need to have some init
or some extension mechanism.
Hopefully none of that
will be required on 10.
And only when you want to do
these things like drivers,
you will have an extension.
And why?
Because extensions are
very tricky to write.
Okay.
If you have a bug,
you may crash a machine.
You are back to the same
kind of very fragile world.
Fundamentally, extension,
kernel extensions are for experts.
Okay.
It's a very hard thing to do,
to write those extensions and make
sure that they are bulletproof.
So because it's hard to
write kernel extension,
we decided to open source
all of the core S layers.
There were other reasons to do that.
I think open source is
clearly a growing movement.
And we're totally part of that.
And that feels great.
But at the same time,
it was also to help you in the case where
you need to write a kernel extension.
We've had great success
with the open sourcing.
We have, I think, 95,000 registrations,
registered developers, which is amazing.
I mean, that's an order of magnitude
more than I would have expected.
And we have a very healthy
exchange with Darwin developers.
We have actually taken some of
the fixes and integrated into
our software that free in 10.0.3,
which is the third software update.
So we've already seen
the benefit of that.
And hopefully, you are running 10.0.3,
and you've already seen
the benefit of this.
So that was kind of just a
few words at the Darwin level.
I'm not going to talk too much
about graphics because Avi did,
I think, an excellent job of
talking about graphics.
Fundamentally, we have 2D,
and that's Quartz, 3D, and that's OpenGL,
and what I would call,
and marketing will probably shoot me, 4D,
and that's QuickTime because
fundamentally,
this is kind of like
the time as I mentioned,
but that's probably not the official
way of talking about those things.
So what we decided for those
technologies is to make the best 2D
technology to adopt the standard for 3D,
the best possible standard,
and we already had QuickTime as for this.
So we essentially wanted to
have the best in each category,
and underneath all those three things,
you have the compositors that mixes all
those things together on the screen,
and that was demonstrated this morning.
The next level up is
the level of frameworks.
And I know many of you are here to
hear about frameworks so that you can
develop your app faster or whatever.
And so we have fundamentally
three frameworks.
Classic is a little bit
special as a framework.
That's of course the compatibility,
that's the way to run
an unmodified binary.
It's still okay to call that a
framework because you can as a developer
actually use Classic because Classic,
like all the other environments,
communicates with
Apple Events and Apple Scripts,
therefore.
So you can, as a developer,
leverage some Classic app
using Apple Events.
That's a way to use that.
Carbon is to help you migrate
your application from 9 to 10.
And Cocoa is to write the
great next killer app.
And of course, more on that later.
The next level up is Aqua, of course.
And this is Aqua.
I'm sure all of you are running
Aqua and you enjoy that.
But Aqua is something else.
It's also the system applications.
We ship about 50 applications
along with Mac OS X and as
many again on the developer CD.
And all those applications
reinforce Aqua.
They are part of Aqua, okay?
It all kind of fits together.
Now, as a developer,
you can reuse some of the
system applications because
some of those applications have
APIs that you can leverage.
For example, if you want to send mail,
you can reuse the mail application
and the underlying frameworks there.
If you have a Cocoa application,
you can reuse other applications
by means of the services menu,
and those kind of things will be
talked in sessions during the week.
And of course, the lingua franca for all
applications is Apple Events.
All the applications can
communicate with Apple Events.
And on top of that,
you can put Apple Script, okay,
to make it easy kind
of to do some workflow.
So this is another powerful means
that you have to develop applications.
So this is a stack.
And I think it's a great architecture,
first of all, because it's layered.
Now, layering is a means of
managing complexity.
It's a means of thinking
straight about things,
okay, having like a separation
between UI and non-UI.
Okay,
so this is how you design a great system,
by thinking straight
in terms of layering.
Now, the other thing,
the other reason why I think it's
great is you have clear boundaries.
You have a clear boundary
between the kernel,
kernel space, and user space.
That means a user application,
I mean an application,
is not going to crash the kernel
and crash the whole machine.
You also have a clear
boundary between each process,
so that means that the
app of your neighbor,
the person sitting next to you,
is not going to crash your app.
Of course,
you would never have a bug in your app.
in Europe, right?
It's a modern architecture.
If you remember the diagram,
at the center of the
diagram you have graphics.
This is not an accident.
We conceived it with
graphics at the heart.
That's why we put so much emphasis
in having those great technologies
there available for you.
It's a no-compromise architecture.
Even for classic,
we didn't have to compromise.
This is amazing.
Actually, classic,
the classic environment is a Unix app.
It runs like another process,
like any other process.
It's a Unix process.
It's a regular process.
We had to do no compromise
to get that to work.
A lot of hard work and very creative
engineering went and was done by the
classic team to make that just work.
The architecture is also very scalable.
It's a base for Mac OS X server
that was announced today,
available today,
that adds services on top of Mac OS X.
So it's a great scalability
in terms of breadth.
It's also, I think,
scalability in terms of time.
I'm very convinced that this
architecture will enable us to
evolve for the next decade or two.
And we'll do that by replacing pieces
in the architecture but not changing
fundamentally the overall diagram.
And so I think the architecture is
going to be a great basis for all of us,
for Apple and for you,
a great basis for innovation.
What I-- oh, here are some pointers
to some of the sessions.
What I selected as my number
two great thing is I/O Kit.
So I/O Kit is an object-oriented
framework to ease development of drivers.
Now, you may think,
object-oriented and drivers?
Are those two things kind
of a little far apart?
So you have to actually go back to the
roots of object-oriented languages.
And the first object-oriented
language was Simula.
That was in the early 60s.
And its goal was to
simulate the real world.
Okay,
and this is exactly what I/O Kit does.
It modelizes the physical world.
For every piece of hardware,
you have a corresponding class,
a corresponding data structure.
So this is a perfect match.
There's another reason
why it's a perfect match.
There's a lot of reuse
going on in drivers.
Very often,
a driver is a subclass of another driver
with just a few things that changed.
Okay, and of course reuse is probably one
of the most well-known characteristics
of object-oriented languages.
So this is why we chose an
object-oriented framework for I/O Kit.
Now, all the basic families encapsulated.
You have a family that
abstracts entire protocols,
USB, fire wires, that kind of thing.
And then you have drivers for
specific pieces of hardware.
I/O Kit is feature rich.
It's true plug and play.
That means it's really dynamic.
At the heart of I/O Kit is
the I/O Kit registry,
which is essentially a little database
of everything that's available on
the machine and all its state and
meta description of those things.
And that's also where all the
matching of devices comes in.
I/O Kit supports SNP.
It's also thread-ready.
It also supports multi-threading,
which means that if you have two
processors and two devices active,
you may actually run one of each on each
processor and gain twice the throughput,
which is great.
Just pure scalability,
automatic scalability.
And it has sophisticated
power management.
So let me go a little
more on power management.
Many of you I've seen in the hallway
have this new great titanium power book,
right?
So why does it wake up so fast?
You've seen the demo
this morning with Avi.
But why?
How did we make that wake up so fast?
I mean, you know from experience
on Mac OS 9 that,
okay, when you open your power book,
well,
you have all these things that happen,
and after a few seconds,
a display comes up,
and the finder gets inside.
It's hacked together,
and then you wait for the
30-second timeout for Apple talk,
right?
So the way on Mac OS X the wake
up happens so fast is because
we map to the physical world.
We have modellised the
concept of power planes.
There's some rules that
you need to follow when you
wake up kind of the devices,
electric rules.
And we follow those rules, okay?
However,
you have several power planes and so
you have this multi-threading and so
in parallel you wake up each plane,
okay?
And so that means that you can wake
up the display along with the USB kind
of subsystems all in parallel.
And because we have lazy
propagation of state changes,
it means that when
Apple Talk finally comes up,
okay, you've been already doing
your email for 30 seconds,
okay, rather than have been
blocked for 30 seconds.
This also shows value of doing the
entire widget all the way from the
hardware and the software stack
and some of the applications.
So I think I/O Kit is
really a great thing.
Some pointers to see I/O Kit sessions.
The third great thing I selected is PDF,
the portable document format.
So for those of you who are
not totally familiar with PDF,
PDF can represent any 2D information.
It can represent any font, okay,
and fonts are so important.
I mean,
this is what we live with every day,
okay, printed paper.
And the ability to represent
every font is significant.
Moreover,
there's this subsetting facility in PDF,
which means that if your document uses
a few characters from one of the fonts,
it will embed those characters
of that font in the document.
And that's why it's portable, right?
Because as you move the document along,
you move the subset of
the fonts that you need,
okay?
And so the recipient of the document
will be able to see the same document.
Okay, this is where the P comes from.
I don't know.
I hope so.
. Some folks from Adobe should
tell me about that.
Now, the other thing about PDF is that
it can represent sampled images.
There's more and more kind of
sampled images coming from all forms,
and PDF is doing a great job at that.
And an upcoming kind of style
of things is vector line art,
okay?
And PDF, again,
can represent that with pure fidelity.
So what does PDF do for you?
Well, the first thing is that
PDF is fundamentally the
PostScript imaging model.
So the PDF imaging model and
the PostScript imaging model,
it's the same.
It means that rather than having
some cheesy model where someone
invents a draw rect or whatever,
you have something which is a pro model,
something that will scale all
the way to pro applications.
Of course,
PDF also means that you get saved
as PDF for free because if your
application draws on the screen,
given that we have all these
Quartz that displays a PDF,
we're able to collect all these
pieces of PDF and put that on a file.
So you get the save as PDF functionality
without much work and you get the
printing functionality as well.
Okay, with what the user sees, okay,
on the screen and what the user gets
on the printed page being the same.
So all that is available
for you for free.
All fonts format are supported so
you don't need to kind of bend your
application for several font formats and
you have color sync as well for free.
Thank you.
Now there's another way you can also
integrate PDF in your application.
It's to use the graphics importer
if you are Carbon and NSImage
if you have Cocoa to integrate
reading of PDF documents.
So not only do you use PDF but you
also integrate with PDF documents.
Here are some pointers to PDF and
some of the Quartz sessions.
The number four thing I selected
is I believe Mac OS X is a
great platform for developers,
for all of us developers.
So what do I mean by that?
On Mac OS 9,
if you develop your application
and your application has a bug,
which typically happens
during the development cycle,
you are taking your chance.
Your application may loop and
never give you back the control.
Your application may crash
and potentially do something
very bad to the machine.
Writing is wrong, low mem,
things like that.
On X, no such thing can happen
because of the protected memory.
So that means that you can be confident
as you develop your application,
as you test it,
as you use Project Builder or some
other IDE to develop your application.
You can be confident it's not going
to crash your entire user world.
So that means you can both use the
machine as a regular Quartz user
and develop on the same machine.
And that, I think, is a significant win.
Also, you have a lot of tools built in.
Mac OS X, the box,
comes with the tools CD and we
ship a broad spectrum of tools.
As Ken was saying,
spanning the whole spectrum from
Unix application to traditional
toolbox-oriented applications
to new kinds of things,
say Java applications or whatever.
And we have great performance tools,
and I'll talk a little
more about that later.
Personally, I spend a lot of my week in
meetings and I don't get too
much of a chance to write code.
So what I like to do on weekends
is kind of go near a beach.
What's very nice is that I can take
my portable along and still kind
of touch code on weekends because
I have my entire world here with me.
I have the portable,
I have access to my email,
and I have access to the tools.
With mobility, that gives you kind of an
extra layer of comfort.
Also with airport,
now present in a lot of places,
in hotels, in airports.
When I say airport, I mean 802.11,
of course, present in airports,
in the physical airport,
and as well as cafes.
It's great, okay?
You can connect to the internet
while being next to the beach,
okay, drinking your espresso.
I really enjoy that.
Thank you.
let's talk about some
of the global features
There are two fundamental technologies
that help us have great global features.
The first one is application packaging.
What application packaging is about is,
from the user perspective,
have a single icon that
represents the app.
Okay, so for our users, it's very simple.
You know, no longer you need to
kind of dig into a folder.
You need to have the icon view
just set up right so that,
you know, the application icon is right
there but all the rest is hidden.
No.
For the user,
you have just a single icon.
For the developer on the other hand,
you have like files and folders.
Okay, and there's a convention on where
you are going to put the languages,
each language in this tree.
And so it's very easy to manipulate.
We call this technology SBML,
single binary multiple languages.
Okay, all you need for your application
is right there in that token.
That's all the resources,
localized resources,
but also things like help, templates,
sub-libraries, if you need that.
In fact, the libraries themselves use
the same packaging technology.
So this,
putting together this technology is
something that I think we did right,
okay, and that has helped us tremendously
for this globalization.
Many of you have an app that
is sold in different countries.
I strongly encourage you to
adopt the application packaging.
It also enables for, you know,
drag and drop install.
You know, drag it to the folder where you
want it to live and you're done.
And I think our users
are going to love that.
The other key technology, of course,
for being global is Unicode.
So our stacks are Unicode throughout.
Okay,
so that is both the Carbon stack and
the Cocoa stack are ready for Unicode.
So Cocoa was already kind
of there a few years ago.
What we did for Carbon is we added
a parallel set of APIs and we
have an abstraction that we call
CFString and all the Carbon stacks
talk in terms of CFString.
Now what we did is CFString,
along with our facilities,
live in the libraries that we
call core foundation that lives
below Carbon and below Cocoa.
We also had to save some
engineering efforts,
of course, and avoid duplication.
Also,
we have a great set of fonts and our
fonts span the entire Unicode spectrum.
So you don't have to worry when you use
Unicode whether this particular character
is going to be available for your fonts.
The system will do that for you.
And I think that's one of the few
worries that you have as developers.
Finally,
we have some great higher level controls,
both in Carbon and in Cocoa,
to enable you to provide for
your users a little text widget,
editable text with rich fonts and so on.
So together those two technologies
have enabled us to ship
Mac OS X in seven languages.
We actually GMed this exact same
day for all seven languages,
which is kind of a first internally.
Soon,
it was announced this morning by Avi,
we will ship in a whole
new set of languages.
We actually GMed that last night,
so very pleased in time
for the conference.
So soon we'll have Chinese, Korean,
and a few other European languages.
So my two take-home points there
is that it's easy to have your app,
SBML, as a single token if
you use that packaging.
And it should be relatively
straightforward to have your app Unicode
ready so that it works in all locales.
These are some of the pointers to
some of the sessions that talk about
application packaging and localization.
So what I would like now is to
invite on stage Tony O'Brien from the
integration team to demonstrate some
of the things I've been talking about.
Tony O' Thank you, Bertrand.
Bertrand just mentioned the
global aspects of Mac OS X.
And what I want to do now is show
you what that means for our users.
So I have a system here
running in English.
I'm going to bring up IE.
It goes to the Apple website.
And I have a URL here in my
doc that brings me to the
Apple Korea Mac OS X website.
So you might ask,
what's so special about this?
Well, because we have Unicode
throughout the system,
and our fonts span the
entire Unicode character set,
even though my system is
still running in English,
I'm able to render Korean and
Japanese and all the other
languages in my apps.
It gets even better.
The user is also able to dynamically
switch the language the OS is running in.
So I'm going to switch this
English OS to running Korean.
To do that,
I drag Korean to the top of the list so
that it becomes the primary language.
And now I'm going to launch TextEdit
and look at the TextEdit menus.
So this app has now been switched to
running Korean just with one operation.
I can also take some of
this Korean text from IE,
drag and drop this into TextEdit.
TextEdit is a Cocoa app, i.e.
is Carbon.
Because all of the text
in my system is Unicode,
this kind of stuff just works.
For the rest of the demo,
I want to switch.
and the rest of the team.
So,
let's get my language back to English.
Drag and drop.
Close this.
Let's quit TextEdit.
I think this one is done safe.
Yep.
So, we can do this kind of stuff
in Mac OS X because TextEdit
is an app packaged application.
So, to the user, they just see one icon,
but inside that package are
all of the localized resources.
So,
this is going to be great for you guys.
You can ship one app all over
the world and it will run in
whatever language the user chooses,
whether they're running the OS in that
language or want to switch to a different
So the next thing I want
to talk about is I/O Kit.
I/O Kit, as Bertrand mentioned,
is an object-oriented driver model.
All of our families are encapsulated,
and the families abstract the
driver developer for the protocols.
So we think this will make really
rapid driver bring up on Mac OS X.
I'm going to show you yet
another plug and play demo.
This is a USB digital camera.
And this camera happens to comply
to the USB mass storage spec,
so it doesn't even need
a driver on Mac OS X.
and two things happened.
The camera mounted on the
desktop here as a USB hard drive.
An image capture was
set up to auto launch.
So I just want to fetch
a few of these images.
I'm browsing the images on the camera.
I'll select these four,
download them to my disk.
The Finder window will pop up with the
four images I just took off this camera.
So the next thing I want to
do is process these images.
I want to change the resolution of
the images to make them smaller,
make them more web friendly.
I also want to make some color
adjustments and that kind of stuff.
So I have four images here.
So what I'm going to do is I'm
going to use two things to do this.
One of them is Apple Script,
and the other is a really cool
app called Graphic Converter.
So I'll open my Apple Script folder.
I have two droplets here.
Select my images, drag and drop.
So this is Graphic Converter.
I've been using Graphic
Converter for years on Mac OS.
It's one of my favorite shareware
apps and I was delighted to see about
a week after we shipped that this
came out as a Carbon app on Mac OS X.
So what's happening now
is Apple Script is talking
to Graphic Converter.
It's changing the color levels,
reducing the color table,
brightness and contrast,
reducing the resolution
of the images and so on.
So this kind of workflow is typical of
what our customers expect from the OS.
They use Apple Script with their
key apps to automate their workflow.
I mean,
I have it here with four pictures.
It could be 400 or 4,000.
And it just works.
OK.
So now we have the four converted
images from Graphic Converter.
And the next thing I want to
show you is FileMaker Pro,
which was announced last week
for Mac OS X as a Carbon app.
I believe it was the first
Mac OS X app to be announced for
Windows and Mac OS X simultaneously.
And we wrote a little image archiver
database for storing digital photographs
so I can add comments and date
information and all that kind of stuff.
And of course,
what I want to do now is take
these four images that I processed
and put them into this database.
But rather than do that
manually for each image,
I'm going to let Apple Script do
the work for me again.
So I have another droplet here.
I'd select these are the images
that came out of graphic converters,
so they're smaller.
So if you're not using
AppleScript on Mac OS X,
you're probably working
a little bit too hard,
especially for this kind of stuff.
And we're done.
So let's look in this view.
and our images came in OK.
And there we go.
Now, the last thing I want to briefly
mention is PDF on Mac OS X.
PDF is a Pro Graphics standard.
It's a great web standard.
It's built into ROS,
and it's great for printing,
because what you see on the PDF on screen
is what will come out in the printer.
So I find it very useful,
because I often send documents
to friends of mine who,
believe it or not,
may not be running Mac OS X yet,
and I'm not sure if they
have the application that
I use to create the document.
So I tend to save documents
as PDF and just email to them.
So you can do that from any app,
no matter what fonts or what
text you use in the document.
It will keep all of that.
I'm going to do it here for
this FileMaker Pro record.
So let's preview this as a PDF to
see what it will come out like when
they view it or when I print it.
And there it is.
Save as PDF.
It's that easy, it comes for free,
it just works on Mac OS X.
So,
in the last few minutes I've just shown
you a simple workflow using a few things.
We started off with seamless
multilingual support,
great plug and play with I/O Kit,
Apple script for automating
tasks across the OS,
and PDF built in,
and we think we've really
got something here.
Back to you Bertrand.
So the next great thing that
I selected for you is XML.
It is a little known fact,
but XML is everywhere on Mac OS X.
So what do I mean?
Well, all your preferences as a
user are stored in XML files.
The little meta files for applications
that describe what are the types
of documents that the application
claims or where to find the icon
for the app are stored as XML.
Plugins are all XML based as
well for the meta description.
Even drivers are XML based.
The way data is exchanged via
the paste board is XML based.
So we have decided to store every
single configuration file and
God knows how many formats there's
always for all those little files.
We decided to use XML for that
whenever there was no predefined
format for those things.
So that's, I think,
a great developer benefit of that
because you don't have to rewrite
constantly a little parser or de-parser,
un-parser, whatever.
You can just reuse the
parsers that we wrote for you.
We put that poster in several places.
We put it in core foundation,
that's beneath Carbon and Cocoa.
It's also having an object-oriented
kind of sugar coating,
and that's in foundation.
And we also decided to put
that in Darwin so that driver
developers can reuse the little
XML poster there as well.
What this will enable your apps to do
is to be a little more data driven.
And that means if you
have some parameters,
say the animation rate or whatever,
you may want to store that
little parameter in an XML file
because it's easy to play with.
You know, no recompilation.
You just change a little value and go.
So I think that will bring a user value,
a developer value to the picture.
This is part of course
for greater strategy,
okay?
That's the strategy to
embrace open standards.
All kinds of standards, you know,
graphics standards, whatever,
or networking standards.
Rather than reinvent the wheel,
we have adopted those standards
and XML is one of those things.
Number seven,
we have a great Java 2 platform.
Now, this may come as a surprise, okay?
Java 2 and Apple are not
necessarily kind of obvious.
Well, we are poised here to have the
best Java desktop operating system.
And why?
Because we take the VM,
the virtual machine, directly from Sun,
the originator.
We take the hotspot Java VM,
that's the best Java VM, right,
from the people who build it.
really understand Java,
who made it happen.
Because the Java VM originally
comes from a Unix environment,
it's very easy to move to Mac OS X.
And so we have to do very
little modifications to get
that great VM onto our system.
And that's why we were able to
get Java 2 so quickly onboard
Mac OS X and then to iterate on
the performance tuning and such.
So what do you want to use Java for?
For cross-platform applications.
I'm sure a number of you already
have some Java applications.
It's going to be great on
Mac OS X because it's standard.
It's cross-platform, right?
There's a twist, though.
The twist is that on Mac OS X you
can also benefit of certain
technologies like QuickTime.
We have a great
Java binding for QuickTime.
And your application,
rather than look and
feel a little different,
like the Java look and feel,
will integrate very nicely with
all the other native applications
because we have done the work so
that you can have the Aqua look
and feel for your Java application.
Also, we keep improving Java and very
soon there will be a Java update
that will enable applets and
browsers and more applications.
Now,
Web Objects 5 was announced this morning.
Web Objects 5 is cross-platform.
It's entirely written in Java.
And it's cross-platform,
but it's best on Mac OS X,
on Mac OS X server.
So remember that.
WebEx 5 is best developed
and deployed on Mac OS X.
A little plug for WebEx folks here.
And what does WebEx really do?
Well, at its heart,
you have like a little
jewel of technology,
which is the ability to
write business logic in Java.
Now,
if you don't know what business logic is,
I strongly encourage you to go to
the sessions that talk about that.
Number eight, performance is of course
a key concern of us.
We always work towards that.
And I'd like to motivate that a little.
We have a great, powerful engine.
That's Darwin, that's a Core OS.
It has extremely fast fundamentals.
It has unrivaled throughputs.
We have great primitives.
You know, VM.
Our VM is really great.
It can take a lot of abuse.
We have great primitives for
tasks and for threads and for
inter-process communication.
But there's one thing
that we've discovered as
Carbon apps were brought along,
okay, either from you as we were kind
of working together on bring-ups
or by ourselves as we were taking
some existing app from 9 to 10,
is that the first bring-up
is really exciting.
You get that window on
the screen and you say,
wow, it's easy.
I carbonized my app.
Okay, it just took me two weeks to get to
that stage of the window on the screen.
The problem is that in some cases,
the Carbon app is not quite
geared to deal with Mac OS X.
In a number of cases, it does polling,
right?
It takes 100% of the CPU.
That's no good.
Also, fundamentally,
the Carbon API is the same
between 9 and 10 via CarbonLib.
However,
that's just the same about the semantics.
It does not mean that the performance
characteristics of the API are the same.
We cannot make it so in a number of cases
because we have a different foundation.
So let me take two examples.
Dragging window is really
faster on 10 than on 9,
and that's because you have
your double buffered windows.
So as you move the window outside,
uncovering another window,
you don't have to
repaint the other window.
You don't have to go through the
painting code of that other app.
So the drag window function is
going to be faster on Mac OS X.
That's built in.
On the other hand,
let's take access to low mems.
Okay, on 9,
an access to a low mem may just
be a function call and just read,
you know, a memory location.
Done.
Okay?
That's, you know, 500 megahertz,
that's a really minuscule
fraction of a second.
On Mac OS X, that state that the accessor
provides may be stored on a server,
a little server that runs
in a separate process.
So you may have to do to access
your LOMEM to go through some
inter-process communication.
That's four orders of
magnitude difference in the
performance characteristics,
which means that your applications
that on 9 was doing in a loop
accessing that LOMEM was just fine.
Nobody would ever notice that.
On 10, suddenly,
that becomes the biggest thing, okay,
performance-wise,
for your application and
dwarfs all the real work.
And so you need to really think,
and I implore you to think
about tuning your application
after the initial bring-up.
That is key to our success.
Now, to help you,
we have put a lot of effort
on performance tools.
We've included a number of
those on the developer CD,
both applications,
developer applications, you know,
the GUI kind of things,
and also command line tools.
Why command line?
Well,
that's the Heisenberg principle when
you do kind of performance tuning,
which is you don't necessarily want to
perturb the system you're observing.
And with command lines,
that's a very lightweight
way of doing things.
Also, you can leverage some of the Unix
facilities for piping things and
scripting and all that stuff to extract
the kind of information you look for.
All our tools work without
requiring recompilation or
relinking of your application.
This morning,
you saw a sampler demonstrated.
There was no, well,
there was some recompiling,
but you were attaching,
Avi was attaching to the running
process without compiling in a
special mode for that application.
We have put a lot of effort on
those tools so that you can analyze
and optimize your application.
All the things that
matter for performance,
like memory usage, like CPU,
like how many system calls
your application does,
or like drawing.
You can also optimize the system
because your application may actually
be fine from a performance standpoint,
but totally take over
some of the other servers,
generate a lot of work for some of
the other servers of the machine.
So we have some tools to
look at the system behavior.
And we have some resources via a book,
a great book on performance.
So now what I would like to do
is invite Robert Bowdidge of
the Performance Tools group,
master of the performance tools,
to demonstrate some of the tools.
Thank you, Bertrand.
I'd like to show you a couple more
of the performance tools that are
available on the Developer Tools CD.
The first one I'd like to show
you is called malloc-debug.
And the idea of malloc_debug is
it helps you understand how your
application is using heap memory,
that is memory you allocate yourself
via request to malloc or to new pointer.
Now,
memory use on 10 is extremely important
because it's so easy to ask for.
You simply say give me some memory
and the virtual memory system
gives you the extra pages you need.
And if the heap needs to grow,
it grows without limits.
So you have no bounds on how
much memory you might ask for.
The problem is that if your application
starts getting a little bit greedy
about how much memory it uses,
it can get to the point where your
application and the rest of the
system may require more memory than is
actually available in physical memory.
And at that point,
the system needs to actually
start taking memory out,
writing it to disk,
bringing new memory in.
That's called paging.
And as a result,
your application will start running
at the speed of the disk rather
than the speed of the processor.
So whatever you can do to keep
your application's footprint
as small as possible will help
improve the performance of
your app and of the system.
Thank you.
So with malloc-debug,
what we can do is we can launch an app.
And in this case, we need something that
is badly performing,
so I naturally decided to
choose one of my own apps.
Nothing like rubbing your nose in it.
This is called Thread Viewer.
You don't have to know
very much about it.
All you have to know is it's a
prototype of a performance tool.
You can select an application,
in this case the dock,
and it gives you a timeline view of
what's going on in that application.
And the colors will change
depending on whether the various
threads are running or not.
So we'll move across the
dock and we see action.
Now, to get to that point,
Thread Viewer needed about
2.5 megabytes of memory.
Actually,
2.7 megabytes of memory on this run.
This seems a little excessive and
I'd like to try to find out why.
Now, the primary abstraction that
mallocdebug uses is a call graph.
and so it shows you all the ways that
various functions call each other and
then it overlays on top of that the
information about exactly how much
memory was allocated at each point.
So for example,
we can see right here that
in main and below we used
about 1.4 megabytes of memory.
The rest was used on other threads.
1.3 megabytes of that was in the
function called NSApplicationMain
that was called by Main.
And that's the entry
to the Cocoa routines.
Also, there was a function called by main
called allocate unneeded buffer.
That called malloc directly and there's
currently one buffer of 10,000 bytes
that was allocated by that function.
This seems suspicious.
I'll come back to that later I suppose.
So if you understand how your
program's built from main down,
you can look at the call tree and you
can try to find the expensive routines.
Sometimes that's not the right way to go.
Sometimes you care more about,
for example, who's using malloc directly.
And so we can see here, for example,
that we used about 856,000
bytes of memory allocated when
we called malloc directly.
About 555K of that was in NSZoneMalloc,
which is the Objective
C version of malloc.
And about 356,000 bytes of
that was one we called NSImage,
which called NSZoneMalloc,
which called malloc.
Now, this is suspicious because,
as you can see,
thread viewer isn't that complex.
There aren't a lot of icons,
there aren't a lot of images.
So something seems wrong here.
So what we can do is we can say,
who called NSReadImage?
we can go up the call tree,
going through the various
app kit libraries.
and we end up in a
function called Image for
Process that's in Thread Viewer.
And luckily I know my code
and I know what this does.
That's the function that populates
ThreadViewer's attached dialog box.
It says here are the applications
that you can examine.
So what's happening here,
because we saw all these icons,
these things that must
be icons in memory,
is that Thread Viewer is
trying to be intelligent.
It's trying to cache the
icons so that the next time
we bring up that dialog box,
we don't have to go out to disk
and read those bytes again.
The problem is, as a result,
we're wasting about
300,000 bytes of memory,
about 75 virtual memory pages,
just to keep those icons in memory.
And if we start running out of space,
all we're going to do is page
them right out to disk again.
This isn't very bright.
Instead, what we want to have happen is
when that dialog box goes away,
we want the icons to go away so
they're not sitting in memory
so there's more memory available
for the rest of the system.
This is an example of how Malik Debug
can help you track down memory problems.
The second tool I want to show you
is called Quartz Debug and it's
out of the Core Graphics team.
The idea is that it helps you
understand how you're doing
drawing in your application.
We can again bring up Thread Viewer.
Let's look at the dock again.
And you can turn on this option called
Flash Screen Updates in Quartz Debug.
And what it does is every time
that you try to do a drawing event,
it colors the screen yellow.
In this way, you can identify where
drawing's happening.
In this case,
Thread Viewer has a one second timer
that causes a redraw to happen.
We can also see when we resize the
window how much drawing goes on.
And we might be able to detect
cases such as when we draw the same
object twice in the same redraw
cycle where we're being inefficient.
Oh, by the way, there's a really cool
feature in Thread Viewer.
Let me show you this.
There's a pause button.
And the reason why you need that
is that if you're ever looking at
information going by and you say,
"Hey, I want to see what's going
on there and see exactly what
functions I was executing then,"
you can hit the pause button.
And what that does is it stops the
application that you're examining,
then it stops the
collecting of information.
However--oh, no.
As you can see, ThreadViewer is still
trying to do the redraws.
We can see in QuartzDebug that the
screen is still flashing yellow.
And this implies that
I did something really bad.
Although I'm correctly pausing the
application that I'm examining,
I'm pausing the data collection,
I forgot to pause the redrawing screen.
And as a result, I'm wasting CPU time.
I'm taking time away from other processes
by causing that redraw to happen.
This is one of those bugs that would be
really hard to track down any other way.
But luckily,
QuartzDebug can make it immediately
pop out that you have a problem.
You can immediately perceive that
you have problems with your drawing.
These are only two of the
tools that are available.
There are several others
on the Developer Tools CD.
Please read the performance
book to learn more.
And if you'd like to learn
more about these tools,
there is a session on Thursday on
the performance tools.
Thank you, Bertrand.
BERTHAND COOPER: Thanks, Bill.
And in fact,
this is the roadmap to some of the
sessions talking about performance.
So the number nine great thing that
I selected is of course great frameworks.
We have great frameworks and Classic is
wonderful and it enables us to transition
smoothly and to transition our users.
But I want to talk
about Carbon and Cocoa.
And Scott in this room,
Scott Foster in this room is going to
go into more details about those two.
So what I wanted to do is bring in my
kind of personal perspective on Carbon.
We had a challenge with Carbon.
The challenge was to take the
traditional Mac toolbox and put
underneath it a modern operating system.
And there were a lot of people who said
this could not be done even within Apple.
And it could not be done because the
toolbox had been designed a long,
long, long time ago, nearly 20 years ago.
It was designed when the
file system was still flat.
It was designed with everything running
its own in one giant address space.
And those assumptions
were embodied in the code,
in the Mac OS 9 code, all over the place.
And of course,
there was totally different
low-level services.
Okay, networking, totally different.
Open transport had to be there,
otherwise it cannot be done.
File system, you have to assume a
different file system,
one that has resource box.
Otherwise, there's no way you can
get the toolbox to run.
So those were some of the challenges.
We also had some goals.
We wanted the carbonization
process to be a tune-up for you,
not a rewrite.
We wanted to modernize.
At the same time,
we were doing this very smooth tune-up.
We wanted to enable you
to do things like Unicode,
okay, with again,
without rewriting your application.
And we wanted to provide
tools to help you,
like the Carbon Data Tools.
So I think it's fair that we've
accomplished a number of those goals,
if not all.
But we've learned quite a
lot of things along the way.
We took the Mac OS X code
base for Carbon,
for the toolbox,
and little by little stretched
it in various dimensions in
order to get the proper layering.
This took a lot of time.
We spent a lot of efforts internally
disentangling this spaghetti bowl.
However, because we started with Mac OS 9
and evolved it to get the
Carbon Toolbox for Mac OS X,
it meant that we had a high
degree of compatibility.
It meant that we didn't have to
rewrite every single error code.
And error codes, as you know,
are something which just takes time
to rediscover one by one all the
exceptional situations that you
need to do in those situations.
We didn't have to do that,
and that meant for you
greater compatibility.
But of course what we've learned,
the hard way for our own apps,
is that carbonization is not enough.
You need to do, we need to do,
some performance tuning.
So this was kind of my
personal perspective on Carbon.
There's a lot of sessions
that talk about Carbon.
That's, I don't know if it's half,
but it's maybe 30% of the conference.
So these are some of the pointers.
The key session is probably
the one just after this one.
Cocoa is a little less
well-known for many of you.
So what is Cocoa?
It gives access to all the
facilities of the machine.
It's fully featured.
It's object-oriented.
It's very modern.
What enables you is to do
rapid application development.
And what that means is that
instead of working very hard to
get your engine in perfect shape,
okay, and polishing your engine
and kind of tuning it,
and then afterwards putting a UI as
the afterthought on top of your engine,
you can totally invert
this development cycle.
You start with the UI.
You are an interface builder
and you start wiring up things.
This is the way to do it.
This is the way I'd like
my app to look like.
It's all fake.
There's no reality.
There's no engine underneath.
Okay, but it enables you to
iterate with the UI.
And little by little,
you put underneath the UI all the
engine codes that you'd like to have.
And at some point, you have your app.
So this is a very different
kind of way of thinking.
Now, in terms of structure,
Cocoa has two layers.
There's a very clear distinction between
what's non-UI and what's UI-based.
So the non-UI set of classes
is called foundation.
The first image that comes
to my mind when I think about
foundation is a set of Lego bricks.
And from day one,
we wanted to have foundation classes
really kind of plug into each other.
It's kind of algebraic,
the notion that everything
just fits with everything.
And nowadays,
Legos have totally diverged.
You have like Star Wars Lego,
the Rock Raiders, you know,
the Adventureland.
And, you know, if you have kids,
you know all those categories of Legos.
And they're all very bizarre shapes,
okay?
No reuse here.
It's no longer object-oriented.
But in my days...
in my days the basic brick was 2x4x3
right and you had you know different
variations on that and you had like
five colors all great colors okay just
very different it was orthogonal it was
an orthogonal toolkit set of bricks and
this is a feeling that you have when you
use foundation few concepts constantly
reused there's a few collection data
types you know string data arrays
dictionary that kind of thing also
that's where we put the xml parser
because obviously it's non-ui things and
then you have facilities to deal with
the rest of the operating system things
like abstracting the task abstracting
a thread you know all those kind of high
level functionality so that's foundation
The App Kit is the set of
UI classes that matches.
It's a rich set of controls.
You saw this morning a demonstration
that Scott did of hooking up like
some App Kit widgets with an extra
thousand lines of code and you get
something that is close to iMovie
in basic functionality at least.
The paradigm that's followed
consistently for the UI classes is
the model view controller paradigm
coming from the early 80s from the
small talk kind of school of thought.
You have some low level objects, buttons,
you know, windows, things like that,
and some high level objects.
An entire tech subsystem with, you know,
phones, with rulers, all that stuff,
you know, with very little cost
for you to use that.
A one-liner or actually it
would be better to say the drag
and drop in interface builder.
You have an entire outline view,
same thing, drag and drop,
you have it in your app.
Or even the reusable toolbars
that you see in mail or
finder can be done that way.
And of course it fully
fits with foundation.
So why is Cocoa particularly interesting
for writing a new application?
Well,
let's look at some of our application.
MEL is a pretty rich
feature set MEL program.
I mean, maybe we can add a few features,
and we are getting a lot of feedback
from all of you on all the bells and
whistles that we should add into MEL.
But it has some basic functionality,
and that's 75,000 lines of code.
That is not a lot for that
amount of functionality.
And actually,
about 20,000 lines of that is reusable
code that's packaged in your library.
The TextEdit application is
a pretty good word processor.
It has a ruler, fonts,
it can embed graphics.
It's pretty rich.
It's only 3,000 lines of code.
In fact, you have that code on your
CD because it's example code.
And you can make a simple text editor,
you know, like the simple text of the old
times with just 50 lines of code.
I believe that's another kind of
tutorial or something like that.
So you are getting a lot of
functionality with Cocoa for free.
And that's kind of the moral about Cocoa.
Here are some sessions
that talk about Cocoa.
And now what I would
like to do is invite C.K.
Haun, who is the director in
developer relationships,
to give us a taste of Carbon and Cocoa.
Mac OS X is an extremely powerful engine,
but an engine is not
what our customers buy.
They buy applications that
take advantage of that engine.
They buy people's applications that
have looked at the things in the core,
that have looked at the architecture,
that have looked at our
frameworks and said,
"That's really great.
If I put this in it,
then somebody's going to have
something even more powerful and even
more exciting." So this afternoon,
what I'd like to do is bring up some
developers who've had that experience,
who've brought their
applications to Mac OS X,
so they can give you some of their
perspective on the task you have ahead
of you over the next three to six months.
I'd like to start by bringing up
our representative from Adobe,
from the Adobe Acrobat team.
Yeah.
Vince?
So Acrobat Reader 5 has a distinction
of being the first Adobe application
to run natively on Mac OS X.
We actually shipped Reader 5.0 nine days
after OS 10 shipped on the Acrobat 5 CD.
We're very pleased to have
Acrobat Reader 5 available for 10
users because unlike the preview
application that comes with 10,
Reader 5.0 supports several advanced
features that people like to use.
For example, you can find text,
you have bookmark support,
you also can do form fill-ins,
support annotations,
and other such features.
We started carbonizing
Acrobat Reader 5 in late 1999,
and by January of 2000 we had it
running on an early version of OS X.
During that process we discovered
something fairly interesting.
We actually discovered that OS X is
an incredible debugging tool.
Simply the fact that it has protected
memory helps us find memory corruption
problems we never found otherwise.
Often these types of problems
are notoriously hard to find,
they're intermittent.
With OS X you do something bad,
it stops you, tells you where you did it,
and you go on.
So Acrobat Reader is very
much a full Aqua application.
It has the full OS X look and feel,
really throbbing icons.
We have multilingual
text fields and even,
most importantly, a really nice icon.
So, as I said,
we learned an awful lot doing the
OS X version of Acrobat Reader 5,
and we're going to take this knowledge,
go back,
and make the next Adobe applications
run on OS X even better.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much, Vince.
That's Vince Parsons from Adobe.
Next I'd like to bring up
Lorin Rivers from Real Basic.
Real Basic is an extremely important
development tool for a lot of our
introductory beginning programmers and
some of the high end professionals.
Lorin.
Thanks very much C.K.
How's it going?
We've had a version of Real Basic that
ran on Mac OS X since last year's WWDC,
and we actually shipped
our Carbon version of
Real Basic before Mac OS X did,
because we were ready.
So... I mean, no comment on... We were
ready to ship our thing.
Our product actually
runs on Mac OS 7.6.1,
on a 68K machine,
all the way up through Mac OS X.
The beautiful thing is, Quadro 660 AV,
like there are some at
my daughter's school,
running Real Basic,
you can ride a Mac OS X app on
a Quadro 660 AV running 7.6.1.
This is pretty cool.
And of course,
there's other operating systems
out there besides Mac ones,
like there's Windows OS.
And you can also write
Windows applications with Real Basic,
which is also pretty cool.
And of course,
we've had a lot of experience
with Carbon being involved
with it for so long.
And what people have been saying about it
being a great debugging tool and a great
excuse to refactor is absolutely true.
So this version of Real Basic,
it's version 3.2.
We've actually had two revisions
of Real Basic since we shipped.
And this version has got more
Mac OS X goodness than any
previous of our releases.
In fact, we've added-- we're actually
eating our own caviar.
And we're starting to reuse a lot of
our own objects in our own application.
So for example, now the project window
is a Real Basic list box.
And the great thing about eating your
own caviar is that it's an opportunity
to add new features that your users
have been demanding for a lot of time.
And it now becomes so much more urgent
when you need to use them yourself.
So what I'm going to build
today is the two-minute app.
So the way Real Basic works is
you drag a control from your tool
palette into your window editor.
What you see is what you get.
We also are big fans of support.
We're supporting UI standards.
So you can see my little dash lines
that are helping me keep within the
parameters that are the UI guidelines.
As always,
you should comment your code and you
should name things intelligently.
So for example, I'm going to-- well,
I'll leave that edit field for now.
I'll drag another.
This is another Control-A-Push button.
And Apple's taken a lot of
really great ideas that we have,
and implemented them in their products,
like there's iterative
development and stuff.
Great minds think alike, right?
So using Real Basic,
you can be iterative yourself.
So I'm going to just start
off by doing a sample.
For example, I want to put a message
box up on the screen.
And I'm going to say the classic
first programming exercise.
and Michael Rahn.
Okay.
That's not a very
interesting application,
although I could compile it,
compile it for Mac,
Mac OS X and for Windows, just like this.
But I'll do something a little more
interesting and I'll go back and say
what I said I was going to do earlier,
which is give it an interesting name.
Like I'm going to call this URL field.
What I'll do is double click my
button again and I'll say URL field.
Nice thing about Real Basic is
it's auto-completing for me.
I'm sorry.
Got ahead of myself.
I'm going to say show URL.
Here's my list of things
that could be show.
Show URL.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, there's my website.
So there I have a
functioning application.
And just to polish it up a little bit,
I'll go in and make it the proper UI.
and say go to URL and I'll be done.
and then we'll just build.
So there's my build.
I can say, make all my settings
and there you have it.
And you've got a compiled application,
100% native, single file,
double clickable, executable file.
Thanks very much.
Appreciate it.
Thank you, Lauren.
One thing that we all work
with every day is the internet,
and one of the important
parts of the internet,
of course,
is to have a rich multimedia experience.
So now I'd like to ask Eric Witman
from Macromedia to come up.
You've already seen
Freehand this morning.
I've asked Eric to talk a little bit
about Freehand and about some of the
Flash activity they did for Mac OS X.
Thanks everyone.
So yeah, Macromedia, clearly,
is very excited about OS X.
When we engaged in a conversation
two years ago about OS X,
we were really excited then.
We're even more excited now.
It's pretty, you can tell from
Macromedia's support of,
you know,
we're the first professional vector
based application that shipped with OS X.
We got a lot of support from Apple,
from the developer community.
The debugging tools, clearly,
are exceptional.
I'm actually agreeing
with my Adobe counterpart.
You won't hear that often.
And, you know,
the public bug base and online
support system that is available
was crucial in getting a lot of
our mission critical issues solved.
We were actually able to ship
a week ahead of schedule,
and we were able to ship with
the latest version of CarbonLib,
which Apple provided
ahead of schedule as well,
which was 1.3.1 for us.
So that was crucial on the freehand side,
and you guys saw freehand earlier.
But another application that we've
actually ported at Macromedia and
have released is Flash Player.
Flash Player affects 336
million people on the web today.
That equals 96% of the people on the web.
They're the most distributed
piece of software on the internet,
and we're even more viewable than, say,
for example, like Java,
which is at 86% viewability.
So it's really important for us when
we're doing any work to make sure that
our code is as stable as possible.
And because we ship with so many
browsers and operating systems,
that the features are consistent
across as many platforms as possible.
And so one of the things that
we found when we did our initial
OS X port for Flash Player was that
we actually exposed some memory
issues that we didn't know about.
And we were actually able to
fix those issues very quickly,
and it actually made our code
structure much more straightforward
than it was historically.
So we actually have a
pretty clean code base,
as it is, and we're only about 200K when
it comes to our compiled app.
So what I did want to
show you is just a bit of
Flash Player running natively on OS X.
And Flash,
as a lot of people think about it,
is actually used for a lot of
animations and user interfaces.
And now as more websites are
actually becoming dynamic,
it's important for people who are using,
like, you know,
Macromedia ColdFusion or ASP, et cetera,
to, you know,
be able to display the code.
And so we're able to do that.
And we're able to be able to
display that application information
in a much more effective way.
So we're finding that people are
using Flash's web application UI,
and it's becoming a standard across
a lot of types of applications.
In this case,
this is an actual application live today.
It's for the city of
Everett in Washington.
And what they're actually
doing is they are replanning,
the city is replanning some of
the older areas of the city.
And instead of just having
a bunch of public meetings,
which take a long time to organize
and you have to get everyone there,
they're doing a web-based version
of their planning application.
So you're actually able to
replan parts of Everett,
Washington.
So what we're going to do is we're
just going to go to our main map area.
So everything that you
see here is Flash-based,
this entire thing.
And we are going to hit up Parkland.
And let's add a couple basic things here,
you know, the ability to actually
drag an amphitheater here.
Sounds like the kid theme is really cool.
Yeah.
And we're going to make it really big,
so let's add a zoo.
And we're going to have
to feed the animals,
so let's put Farmland there.
And we need some fertilizer,
so let's add a horse arena.
And once you actually do that,
you can actually natively print.
Our native print operations,
or print operations in FlashPlayer
are native on OS X as well.
And you can actually submit this.
And that information via our XML support
goes directly to the application server,
and then to the database.
And then these people can
view the results offline.
So it's a really excellent example
of a web application in FlashPlayer.
And like I said,
we have had a very positive
experience when it comes to
porting very complex applications
and old applications like Freehand,
Freehand 10, and even somewhere on the
lower end of the spectrum
from a complexity standpoint,
which is FlashPlayer.
And as Tom mentioned
earlier in the keynote,
we're actually in the middle of porting
the rest of our web publishing apps.
Flash, the authoring application,
Creamweaver, and Fireworks.
And again,
we're getting a lot of excellent
help from the Apple folks.
And we really appreciate it.
And I encourage you guys
to jump on the bandwagon,
because thus far, it's been a good one.
It's been a good experience.
Nothing without pains,
but a good experience, nonetheless.
Thank you.
Thank you, Andrew.
I mean, Eric.
We've talked about Carbon applications
across a variety of market segments.
Now I'd like to bring up
Andrew Stone from Stone Design to
talk about the Cocoa experience.
Ah, thank you.
The Cocoa experience.
Let's see.
I started in 1989.
And three years ago,
when Gil was the I CEO,
I got to come up and demonstrate Create.
And since OS 10 took a little bit
longer than we might have thought
to get to this wonderful day-- thank
you-- I got six more apps written,
so I'm going to show you an application.
I'm going to show you the Stone Studio.
And what I'm going to show you
is how Cocoa lets you have all
your apps talk to each other
without hardly adding any code.
There's no special code here other than
just writing to pasteboards and stuff.
So this is time equals money.
It's a way to check
how long your demo is.
And so we'll start a new time session.
And Create is our web publishing,
illustration, and page layout application
built from ground up in Cocoa.
And so you can,
everything's an object and I'm just going
to resize this guy a little bit and bring
up our little kind of poor man's flash.
What it is,
is it's an animation thing where you can
just set some attributes and make your
graphic or set of graphics do stuff.
And if I save that,
Then that automatically
launches another application,
actually one that's free, gift fund.
The source is available at
stone.com if you want to see
how a Cocoa app is written.
And so it will,
it comes up and then it displays
it in your favorite browser,
whatever that is.
Actually the Omni guys are next, so.
And then you can do stuff like drag the,
a URL onto an object so
that you can load web,
web addresses and stuff.
And then from gift fund,
I can just actually take the output
from that application and put it in.
Slice and dice is,
lets you take images and turn
them into JavaScript rollovers,
which is gnarly code that
we hate to write by hand.
And so I can just save that for create.
And one thing, never type onstage,
or if you do.
It's amazing how you can randomly
type the same exact thing.
So I can drop that in.
And then, Pstill is our low-cost
distillery that lets you take
freehand and Illustrator files,
EPS, or PostScript,
and convert it into something you
can actually see live in OS X.
And so you can instantly play with
your opacity and all that stuff.
And Photo2Web is an application that
lets you manage your digital photographs,
create websites, thumbnails, slide views,
that kind of thing.
But what I like to use it for is
to quickly grab hunks of image
for use in other applications,
just drop it in.
So I'm going to make
another page and create,
go back to time equals money,
and hit now.
OK?
Well, there's one thing left to do,
really, and that's make an invoice
and bill you guys for this.
And so what I'm going to do is now create
a web page from all the junk I brought
in from all those other applications.
And so once again, a browser gets called
and to display the stuff,
you got your table of contents, your GIF,
automatic nav bars,
and there's your JavaScript.
See, they're changing color.
And there's the bill.
So finally,
There really is one more thing to do,
and that's show you our
Shareware Pack Up and Go,
which lets you,
you can instantly save things out
of Create with the image well.
But if you drop it on the Pack Up and Go,
it'll launch and make a tarball for you,
then you can drag that into
some other application.
Free CDs of the Stone Studio while
they last are at the
exhibit hall at our booth.
Number 15, I got it in, woo!
Thank you, Andrew.
The internet,
the collaboration between all of us
working together at a lot of remote
locations or in large or even small
companies is really important to
a lot of our customer segments.
And I'd like to ask Marc Parmet
from MeetingMaker to come up
to talk about their experiences
with bringing MeetingMaker to 10.
We've been in the
Carbon game for a while.
Late last winter through the
diligent work of our chief
architect Rob Ciccolini,
we started on the path towards Carbon and
by early 2000 had a working version.
Apple is not only a partner of ours,
but one of our customers,
so it's been beaten up famously
at Apple over the last year.
We learn a lot about our
successes and our mistakes.
Thank you very much.
There were two real pieces that we
wanted to gain from the OS X experience.
One was graphics.
So we were overdue for a real
good user experience overhaul.
And the first thing that we were
able to leverage out of OS X was this
great graphics experience with Aqua,
top to bottom.
While we may not be the
sexiest application up here,
we are in use by millions of people every
day and it's all about juggling people
and places and resources in real time.
So the objective here was to give
our millions of customers a really
cool user experience without having
them forced into relearning an
application that they use by the hour,
by the day, by the week.
So in every window across
every part of the app,
OS X really helped us to reinvent things.
You heard Steve and Avi and
Ken and Bertrand talk an awful lot
about the globalization of OS X,
and that's the other key piece for us.
We answer the when question.
Gee, I'd like to be able to
put six people in a room,
in a conference room and
add a data projector.
When can we do that?
When is the best time for us to meet?
So the way we were able to leverage
OS X is to create this wonderful
new engine in Media Maker 7
called client-side time zones.
Let's say we had to meet with our
peers not just across California or
across the U.S., but across the world.
And I needed to find out exactly the
right time without having to compute
higher math while I'm trying to put
something simply on my schedule.
We are the first app in the world,
and by the way,
we will be the first collaborative
app available on OS X this summer.
We're in final beta now.
Shameless plug,
you can go to our website today,
MediaMaker.com,
and download the latest beta on Carbon.
But we have not done just 24 time zones,
but all 319 discrete time
zones throughout the world
are built into MediaMaker.
Which means if you've
got your calendar up,
and Bertrand's on the phone
and would like to meet with
you tomorrow in Indianapolis,
which by the way,
is in a totally different time
zone from the rest of Indiana,
you simply click on Indianapolis.
Click on the wonderfully throbbing
OK button and there you go.
It's just re-registered your
calendar in Indianapolis.
Or if you're lucky enough to
be Bertrand and working from,
let's say, the Aleutian Islands,
[Transcript missing]
Thank you very much, Marc.
I would also suggest that Avi's
interaction with the meeting maker
team may have influenced some of it.
At this point,
I'd like to bring up Wil Shipley,
president of the Omni Group,
to talk about some of the
Cocoa perspective for someone who does a
whole lot of applications very quickly.
Let me just launch the wrong app.
So, a duck walks into a bar.
No.
and David I had some jokes but
Apple requested I took them
out because they weren't funny.
So what am I going to talk about?
Show it.
Sometime.
Yes.
That's it.
I'm guessing most of you
are familiar with it.
And if you're not familiar with it,
you're probably familiar with browsers.
So I'm not actually going to
go through it because we're
a little pressed for time.
What I do want to talk about
is Cocoa and how great it is.
So I'm sort of here as
unpaid shill for Apple,
as it were.
Fundamentally,
I'm a Cocoa programmer because I'm lazy.
I want to write only the
parts of apps that are new,
that are different, that are creative.
That's why I got into this business.
And Cocoa enables you to write apps ten
times as quickly as any other toolkit.
And you've all heard
that a million times,
and you don't believe me, of course,
because you're like,
"I've heard it a million times."
So what I hope to do is give
just two examples of the kind of
productivity gains you get with Cocoa.
And then maybe I'll get you
interested enough to actually select
the Cocoa book from O'Reilly &
Associates rather than the Carbon book
and maybe win some converts.
The first example is OmniWeb,
our browser.
It doesn't do everything in the world,
but it is,
according to one unscientific poll I saw,
the most popular browser on OS X.
And this was a web poll, so who knows?
Maybe it was just my friends voting.
I don't know.
But still, it was really nice that
that many people knew us.
There's only two and a half people
working full time on Omni Web.
And I think you have an idea of how
big the other browsers teams are.
And yet, you know, we're
We're providing a professional quality
browser from two and a half people.
So what's the rest of my company doing?
I think an even better example
of productivity gains is
the game ports we've done.
Right next door,
there's a games pavilion and
every app running under OS X,
every game running under
OS X is a Cocoa game.
and all those ports were worked on by us.
And bigger than that,
all those ports were worked on by us
since about January 15th of this year.
And bigger than that,
they were all done by one guy.
it was only part-time by one guy.
So as you're playing those games...
Tim Wood.
We love him.
Yeah, this is my highly technical
3M note-taking device.
It's post-it.
Also, we have a booth out in
the hall along with,
I think, six other companies that have
been invited by Apple to help
people get their apps to OS 10.
If you want to stop by any of our booths,
we specialize in Cocoa.
The other guys do Cocoa and
Carbon or other stuff.
Please do no charge to talk.
Thank you.
The productivity applications,
calendaring applications, web browsers,
and things like that is all
what we do so we can make money,
so we can buy and play games.
So I'd like to ask
Graeme Devine to come up,
Chief Designer for id Software.
Thank you.
Boy, seems like we've shown Quake
3 and running a bunch of
keynotes for a bunch of years,
but...
Now you've all been playing it and
you can see how it runs next door.
It's running really well.
We've ported two things to Mac OS X.
We've ported our Doom technology,
which was shown by Steve back
in January in Tokyo,
well February in Tokyo,
and we ported Quake 3.
That process has been a
real big education for us.
As much as we loved
Mac OS 9 as a consumer OS,
and it was a great
consumer OS and still is,
it was very hard to make that
your primary development tool.
Let me go switch off the radio.
[Transcript missing]
Do the wonderful things
like debug the application,
have it crash on you,
and up comes the Macintosh debugger
giving you a kernel panic with all
the useful information of the stack
and what the radiuses contain.
That's really not very helpful
for decoding your application.
So I started to work with
Mac OS X back about a year ago,
when DP4 came out.
And I started to deal with all of
the wonderful-- the beta operating
system and how cool can that be.
I'm the one person in
the office running it.
How cool is this?
And all of a sudden,
it started to get useful.
It started to become, oh, well,
this mail app's actually kind of cool.
Oh, well, I want this Cocoa stuff.
I can actually do things like that,
like use the Omni Group's
foundation classes,
their timer group, and so forth,
and just bring that stuff in.
And it's easy.
And it runtime binds.
And it does all the little cool things.
All of which makes Mac OS X a
great primary development tool
over other competing operating
systems which we've used before,
typically Windows.
So now, as id,
we develop on both Windows and
Mac OS X simultaneously.
And that helps us greatly because
as you've heard time and time again,
people coming up, they say, "Oh,
we found bugs in the memory thing
when we ported across X that we
didn't find in 9." And somehow
we missed it for 10 years.
But it really does happen.
You cut, you know,
you bring out your app,
you compile it with MetroWorks in Nine,
and it goes through and
does the right thing,
and you know, it ain't ever gonna crash.
You bring it up in MS Dev under Windows,
and it compiles,
and it has a few more warnings
that you fix that perhaps,
you know,
the MetroWorks compiler should have done,
and it compiles just great and
runs for the next 10 years.
You bring it into Mac OS X,
and you put up that warning level
up to the severe warning level,
and you've got 3,200 warnings
when your application builds,
and you think, golly.
Then you run it, and your application,
you know, runs great,
and it's leaking merrily like a
sieve that it's never done before.
So you start to use some
of the apps like Sampler.
And I use VTune all
the time under Windows,
and Sampler was a surprise for me to use.
This comes from Apple.
It wasn't coming from Motorola or
some other surprising company.
Apple made this great tool that
helps me get Doom up and running
to 30 FPS for February 24 for
Steve in Tokyo the night before.
That was a story.
It also let us tune this app,
which is Team Arena.
We've been working on a
remaster of Team Arena for
quite a little bit of time.
It's the first game that's
going onto CD that's Will Ship,
the actual Windows version, Win32,
the classic OS 9 version,
and the Cocoa version all
together on the same CD.
there's a lot of good reasons for taking
a classic app and trying to carbonize it.
In many cases that works
just absolutely wonderfully.
But I think if you really want
to look towards the future and
grab the potential of OS X and
grab your customer's attention,
especially when your application has
all the multimedia goodness that games
have and so forth that you want to show
through OS X and your operating system,
then Cocoa is the way to go.
It's absolutely the best development
environment in the universe.
Nothing beats it.
And I don't think that anyone who works
in Cocoa and actually puts an app out
there will disagree with me at all.
Anyway, Quake 3,
it's why you actually bought a Mac, so...
Macintosh operating system,
Mac hardware is an absolute great
gaming platform and it's great for
customers to be able to play games.
And thank you for having me.
Thank you very much, Graeme.
You saw a bunch of applications
that are either shipping or very,
very close to shipping on Mac OS X.
You've seen the slides about
people wanting your applications.
I'm hoping to see at least 60% of
your applications at Macro New York.
Thank you.
Thank you, C.K.
So, we're a little late.
You probably lost track,
but that was my number
nine great frameworks.
So, what's missing?
What's my number ten?
Any idea?
I could absolutely not have these ten
great things about Mac OS X without
having at least my number ten being Aqua.
So, we run short of time.
I'm not going to talk about Aqua.
I've been using it for two years
and it's still as fresh as day
one and I think it's wonderful.
And thank you a lot for all
the feedback on Aqua which has
helped us make it much better.
So, Aqua is the most great visible
thing about Mac OS X and I think
many users out there are going
to equate Mac OS X with Aqua.
They won't know about the... you know,
underpinnings,
the great foundation and all that stuff.
They will think about Aqua.
Now, I think this is a great opportunity
for you because I believe there
will be a lot of demand for
your application to be Aqua if,
in case you don't already
have such an application.
So, the good news is that you're going to
get a lot of the Aqua support for free.
The basic Aqua support via
Carbon or Cocoa or even
Java you are getting for free.
If you want to do fancier things,
you know, integrate better,
you can do that.
You can get better with Aqua,
have sheets that drop down and you know,
and the like.
You can use some of the
advanced APIs that we provide.
Again,
we've done most of the hard work there
so it should be fairly straightforward to
add those features to your application.
And we have like a book with
the UI guidelines and we have
interface builder with the little,
you know, dotted blue lines to help you
kind of make your application,
your UI, Aqua compliant.
So, these were my 10 tips.
Thank you.
And these were my 10 great
things about Mac OS X.
There's a lot more great things
about Mac OS X that I'm sure
you like or you appreciate.
Always press my time.
That's the story of my life.
The greatest thing though
is that we shipped.
Okay, we shipped on March 24th,
about two months ago.
Today, we announced that every single
machine coming out of the factory is
going to have Mac OS X pre-installed.
Okay, ahead of schedule.
This is significant.
We already have a number of applications,
about 600 applications.
And I believe that by
the end of this week,
we may have quite a few extras.
So, I believe we'll get a lot of
applications from you this summer.
The ball is in your court now.
We've done a lot of hard work.
We will continue to move on
and we're here to help you.
So, enjoy the conference.
Thank you.